Unit A3: “Nucleic Acids” Note Sheet

Introduction to Nucleic Acids:

Nucleic acids are large polymers of unit molecules called nucleotides.

Nucleotides themselves have three pieces:
Five-carbon sugar
A phosphate ion
A nitrogenous base ("contains nitrogen")

There are two types of nucleic acids:
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA): makes up chromosomes and genes
controls all cell activities, including cell division and protein synthesis
undergoes mutation important to the process of evolution
Ribonucleic Acid (RNA): works with DNA to direct protein synthesis



Structure of Nucleic Acids:

Nucleotides:

The sugar that is found in DNA is deoxyribose, while ribose is used in RNA.

The phosphate group is always the same, but the nitrogenous bases differ slightly between DNA and RNA.

Nitrogenous Bases:

There are four different bases in DNA – two of each of two different types.

Purines are double-ringed structures.
Adenine (A) and Guanine (G) are purines.

Pyrimidines are single-ringed structures.
Thymine (T) and Cytosine (C) are pyrimidines.

Purines always bond with pyrimidines, through hydrogen bonding.

Adenine pairs with Thymine.

Cytosine pairs with Guanine.

This is known as complementary base pairing, and other combinations of these purines and pyrimidines cannot exist due to their molecular dipoles being incompatible.

In contrast, RNA is a shorter, single-stranded molecule produced from a segment of DNA to take genetic information into the cytoplasm.

The base thymine does not exist in RNA. It is replaced by uracil, which is a very similar pyrimidine.

That is, uracil bonds with adenine in RNA.

The Double Helix of DNA Molecules:

Molecules of DNA, along with small ball-like proteins called histones, form chromosomes. The DNA component has a spiraling ladder-shaped backbone of alternating deoxyribose and phosphates.

Bases are bonded onto each sugar and H-bonded to each other, holding the two strands together, which forms a "double helix" structure.

Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP):

Another particularly important nucleic acid is the modified nucleotide known as adenosine triphosphate.

ATP is a modified RNA nucleotide with an adenine base (adenine + ribose = adenosine), with two additional phosphate groups attached to its phosphate.






The bond between the outer two phosphates is very high in energy.

When it is broken by the enzyme ATPase, much energy is released, which can be used by the cell (for example, for muscle contraction).

The free phosphate group exists as inorganic phosphate (Pi).

The ATP Cycle:

The bond between the first and second phosphates is also high in energy, but not as high as between the two end phosphates.

Once sufficient energy is available in the cell, the components of ATP can be reunited back into the energy storage molecule through a process called phosphorylation.

This is a combination of reactions known as the ATP Cycle.
